# Welcome to CIVE4777 and CIVE4778

_Chile and Argentina May 7 - Jun 7 2025_

## CIVE4777
This course, which will be offered in Chile and Argentina, combines the science, engineering, economic, social, and policy aspects of how cities and megaregions can prepare themselves for climate change and natural hazards. Weather extremes have been highlighted as a global risk of highest concern by the recent Global Risk Report of the World Economic Forum, which has also ranked failure of climate adaptation and mitigation as among the highest risks. Climate change impacts are expected to be felt in both coastal and inland cities from Buenos Aires to New York and Santiago de Chile to Phoenix. Among the relatively near-term impacts will be melting of glaciers in the mountains as well as sea and land ice in the poles. The Andes glaciers, which supply water for agriculture, industry and ecosystems along the west coast of South America, are in danger of receding owing to climate change. Meanwhile, climate induced changes in the patterns of the El Niño Southern Oscillation are likely to cause significant changes in the space-time distribution of precipitation, extending periods of drought and intensifying extreme weather events.  In the arid and semi-arid regions of Chile and Argentina, irrigation planning is important for food security. However, competition between industrial export agriculture and mining and domestic water needs creates a need for creative solutions to reduce water use and to capture and store water when precipitation does occur. Landslides when it rains too much and wildfires when it rains too little can upend existing economies, cultures, and ways of life. 

The impacts on water resources, food, and energy, infrastructures, ecology, and biodiversity, are expected to be enormous. We will learn about these concepts at three locations: Santiago de Chile, in the foothills of the Andes at the heart of a country the spans from the driest desert in the world to the icy fjords of Patagonia; Punta Arenas, Chile, a coastal city in Patagonia which serves as a hub for Andean and Antarctic research and tourism; and Córdoba, an Argentinian city in a region facing increasingly severe droughts and wildfires. Each city will serve as a case study in learning about how the ecosystems surrounding each city have shaped their infrastructure, and how changes in the ecosystem and climate require them to adapt. A primary objective will be to understand how a globally competitive, yet vulnerable economy adjusts to the reality of climate change and weather or hydrologic extremes. 

Our travel through the southern Andes will expose us to different cultures, languages, religions, climates, ecosystems, and economies. During our visit to el Cajón del Maipo, we will learn about climate change, urbanization, and water challenges along the Maipo and Mapocho rivers and about the impacts of climate in the national capital. Our visit to picturesque Punta Arenas will take us into the heart of Patagonia, we will learn about the vulnerability of mountain glaciers. Our visit following a summer projected to be a strong La Niña producing warmer and drier conditions in southern Chile and Argentina, will provide context to discussions on resilience to extremes.

At the conclusion of this course students will be able to: 
* Develop a basic understanding of the science of climate change and natural hazards. 
* Understand the concepts of adaptation and resilience as these apply in urban or coastal settings. 
* Learn introductory concepts and tools for pertinent analysis and decision making.

## CIVE4778 
This course will explore Chile and Argentina, specifically, Santiago, the national capital of Chile in the foothills of the Andes; Punta Arenas, a Patagonian port city in Chile; and Córdoba, the second most populated city of Argentina located in a savanna-like ecosystem. A focus will be on how each country chooses to participate in international climate and emissions negotiations, and how they can further their development in this context. The implications for the nations of Chile and Argentina, and their outlook towards global policies, will be discussed. The discussions will be put in the context of the history and culture of South America. A primary objective will be to understand how resource constraints drive decisions and policy related to circular economy, renewable energy and frugal innovation. The course will emphasize how the natural and human engineered systems interact in the context of climate science and mitigation, the importance of data and computational sciences and the possible role of AI, as well as interpreting the roles of cultures in ancient yet continuous civilizations with recent history of colonization, and in general on the role of history and culture. The students will be encouraged to think about possible lessons learned for emerging economies, as well as for the climate and mitigation policy of developed economies such as the United States. 

A climate change war game described adaptation as “managing the unavoidable” and mitigation as “avoiding the unmanageable”. Reducing fossil-fuel emissions may limit global warming and hence climate change consequences but may be perceived as disruptions to growth. Balancing these constraints is a clear and present need for nations across the globe, regardless of their development stage. The students will learn about climate mitigation and policy based on discussions with the instructor, as well as possible interactions with guests from academia, private industry, and government agencies. The students will also get an opportunity to get immersed in the culture of Chile and Argentina, and visit some of the cities, mountains, coastlines, as well as ecological and tourist attractions, to get acquainted with the long and continuous history and culture of the places we are visiting.

The course will culminate with a mock “war game” with focus on arid regions, with a specific focus on global emissions and increasing temperatures. In addition to uncertainties, risk assessment and mitigation, the obligations of the largest emitting countries and the developed countries will be assessed. Issues related to water resources, including saltwater intrusion and changes in precipitation patterns, temperature extremes especially heat waves, inundation and storm surge, as well as population movement and climate refugees, will be discussed. Resembling a situation where international negotiators meet to formulate treaties on climate change mitigation to reduce adaptation costs. Each student will need to participate in the war game and demonstrate her/his understanding of the science and policy imperatives. Students will be working in groups to produce integrated presentations. Students will be divided into groups for the war-games. These groups will represent concerned parties, such as Chile and Argentina, developing South American nations, Caribbean Islands, North American nations, and the United Nations. Inter-regional discussions and negotiations will be enabled by the moderator group.

At the conclusion of this course students will be able to:
* Develop and demonstrate the ability to grasp a different culture and understand the extent to which lessons learned may be generalized.  
* Clearly express their opinions in written and verbal work and support their opinion with relevant, well-researched and detailed evidence.  
* Demonstrate their grasp of the climate change mitigation policy challenges and imperatives for the mountain, inland plains and coastal regions of southern South America. 

